U.S. Steels Decline Explains Why You Need to Adopt AI

Odd right? What possibly could the decline of an industry over 50 years agos teach people today about the need to adpot AI tofsy?  Plenty.  A Bethlehem engineer in the 1980s succinctly described steels decline this way; "We were making evolutionary changes when a technological revolution was going on."  Most of this post's observations come from the outstanding book "Crisis in Bethlehem." [1]. Anyone who has interest in technology, labor, tariffs, industry, pretty much every aspect of how we live today ought to give it a read.  It documents the downfall of Bethlehem Stell with deailed accounts of decline from post-WWII through 1986.   

Historical Perspective
The steel industry was the economic force in the United States post WWII.  It accounted for x% of the economy in 1948.  It provided the raw material that flowed to virtually every U.S. industry.  Automotive, appliances, highway infrastucture, bridge and building construction all the way down to barbed wire and nails.  If it was made of steel and was for sale in the U.S. in 1948, xx% of it came from U.S. steel plants.  U.S. steel dominated. No company was as synonomous with steel as was Bethlehem Steel.

In 1958 Bethlehem steel was the world’s second largest steel producer in the U.S. and therefore the world.  They dominated the industry and produced xx % of U.S. steel.  By 1986, less than 30 years, their dominance was over with integrated steel mills closing in the U.s.  From one of the most revered management teams to a company that was finished.  How did this happen?  Three reasons sum it up.  Read on.

Failure to Accept Steel Making Innovations


Japan and Europe were in receipt of U.S. aid to reconstruct from the devastation of WWII.  This enabled the steel industry in these countries to adopt innovative technologies.  True, their percentage of steel production was minimal compared to the U.S.  But the processes and technologies they adopted in the late 1940s and 1950s were the state of the art.  The demise of U.S. steel dominance was seeded in these years.

There were voices in Bethlehem steel that sought out innovation, that attempted to begin initiatives to innovate.  But they always fizzled out.  A perfect example is continuous casting.  Continuous casting is a steelmaking process in which molten steel is poured into a water-cooled mold and continuously withdrawn as a solidifying strand, rather than first being cast into large ingots that must later be reheated and rolled. [1]

Bethlehem steel realized this was an innovative process.  In fact, they performed a proof of concept at the 

Lesson 1: Accept New Technology As Soon As Possible
Audience:  All of Industry and Academia
Dangerous, right? Why would one ever do that.  Continuous casting.  Overconfidence was the demise.
How many companies have done pilot projects.  Not dug enough. Not tried again and again.

Lesson 2: Be Nimble and Seek Efficiencies Everywhere
Audience:  The AI Beheamoths - Be Warned!

Those NVIDA boxes - they are going to invert this.  

Lesson 3: Accept that Labor Allocations Will Change Dramatically
Audience: Everyone

Not compettive  - WTC example.  153M vs. 80M.  Not a team - a composable team.  Roles and people are not looking for projects to consume their time.  Rather, there are projects, and teams are composable and for many software engineering projects the teams are ephemeral and the volume of labor will go up and down. A lot.



References
[1] ChaGPT on 28 July with the prompt: “what is it continuous casting and why was it innovative.”
